In data science, there are many terms that are
used interchangeably, so let's explore the
most common ones. The term big data refers to data sets that are so
massive, so quickly built, and so varied that they defy traditional analysis methods such as you might perform with
a relational database. The concurrent development
of enormous compute power in distributed networks and
new tools and techniques for data analysis means
that organizations now have the power to analyze
these vast data sets. A new knowledge and insights are becoming
available to everyone. Big data is often described
in terms of five V's; velocity, volume, variety,
veracity, and value. Data mining is the process of automatically searching
and analyzing data, discovering previously
unrevealed patterns. It involves preprocessing
the data to prepare it and transforming it into an appropriate format. Once this is done, insights and patterns
are mined and extracted using various
tools and techniques ranging from simple data
visualization tools to machine learning and
statistical models. Machine learning is
a subset of AI that uses computer algorithms
to analyze data and make intelligent
decisions based on what it is learned without being
explicitly programmed. Machine learning algorithms
are trained with large sets of data and
they learn from examples. They do not follow
rules-based algorithms. Machine learning is what enables machines to
solve problems on their own and make
accurate predictions using the provided data. Deep learning is a
specialized subset of machine learning that uses layered neural networks to simulate human
decision-making. Deep learning algorithms
can label and categorize information
and identify patterns. It is what enables AI systems to continuously learn on
the job and improve the quality and accuracy of results by determining whether
decisions were correct. Artificial neural networks, often referred to simply
as neural networks, take inspiration from
biological neural networks, although they work quite
a bit differently. A neural network in AI is a collection of small
computing units called neurons that take incoming data and learn to make
decisions over time. Neural networks are often
layer-deep and are the reason deep learning
algorithms become more efficient as the data
sets increase in volume, as opposed to other machine
learning algorithms that may plateau
as data increases. Now that you have a
broad understanding of the differences between
some key AI concepts, there is one more differentiation
that is important to understand that between Artificial Intelligence
and Data Science. Data Science is the process
and method for extracting knowledge and insights from large volumes of disparate data. It's an interdisciplinary
field involving mathematics, statistical analysis,
data visualization, machine learning, and more. It's what makes it
possible for us to appropriate information,
see patterns, find meaning from
large volumes of data and use it to make
decisions that drive business. Data Science can use many of the AI techniques to
derive insight from data. For example, it could use
machine learning algorithms and even deep learning
models to extract meaning and draw
inferences from data. There is some interaction
between AI and Data Science, but one is not a
subset of the other. Rather, Data Science is a
broad term that encompasses the entire data processing
methodology while AI includes everything that allows
computers to learn how to solve problems and make
intelligent decisions. Both AI and Data Science can
involve the use of big data. That is, significantly
large volumes of data.